---
title: "Colors-and-Currents"
date: 2021-07-11
category: stories
tags: [colors, currents, new age bullshit, realistic fiction]
---

I first published this on a wordpress on August 9, 2016. 

        Just a bit of coalescing fruit juice and perhaps a small strand of pulp shone on the small plate before her, and Carter pushed it a little further from the edge of the long common hall table as she rose. The fingers of her left hand closed obediently around her dappled translucent cup, but her mind scarcely noticed it, instead paying its attention to the obligations of her standing position. To the left required fewer steps, but there the chairs were pulled back further, their occupants leaning back after the meal; they were unfamiliar to her besides, with the scarlet wristbands of the Briggs’ Scholars program, and all together non-dislodgeable. She moved right.

        Twisting sideways to slide between the uneven row of chair backs, Carter turned back towards the cohort of B.S. kids. She got over the entertainment value of the acronym pretty quickly–she was a bit mature for it– but it had a certain ironic fit. One boy at the end of the table, fourteen or so, with wavy blond hair and a rounded, pre-high school face, stood up from them. The noise in the hall drowned out whatever he was saying or laughing, but she thought, lowering her cup hand to squeeze through a tight coupling of chairs, it smacked of typical self declared special middle schooler immaturity. The duo of smugly shocked smile on the bottom half of his face and hazel eyes looking a mix of glee and confusion were its quintessential expression.

        Clearing the chairs, a voice called her name. Carter turned to it, two tables behind, and said hi; it came from a kid from one of Acacia’s CS foci who she’d tossed around a frisbee with besides just seeing around. A girl in a navy sweatshirt crossed before her as she turned back, who Carter recognized from her own E and M physics focus.  Carter had never known any other Sophia’s to shorten the name to “Phia,”  but for Carter’s purposes that was the peak of her uniqueness. Phia seemed clever enough, and had taken lots of math, but displayed more interest in justifying her Bostonian slang and talking about the current season of Game of Thrones, in a manner that made Carter suspect she hadn’t read the books. Once during study hall Carter had tried to get her more focused, but when she handed Phia the whiteboard marker to write with she just twirled it and began talking about friends back in Boston, eventually capping the marker altogether and pressing it into the table such that the backspin would send it out and back again into her hand. Carter had engaged her in the conversation a little– a big part of the experience she knew was social– but repeated grew bored of it and tried steer the conversation back towards Ohm’s law, without much success.  With more weeks behind her in the program than in front, Carter didn’t go out of her way to talk to Phia much now; she’d settled into her own group, although in truth they often weren’t that different.

        Carter walked to the dining counter and looked over the fruit, mostly just because it was there. She saw basically the usual, although some black grapes joined the green, atypically.  She’d left her fruit plate on the table though, just having come to refill her water, and so she turned towards the drink machine.  The B.S. kid stood around there, apparently telling something to two others in the human current entering the hall. His face showed excitement as if from reveal, and Carter now thought that part of the reason he and and rest of them looked so immature was that they didn’t seem to restrain any of it. A few steps took her to the edge of the crowd encircling the drink machine, though at this moment no one actually touched the plastic spigots. Or maybe not no restraint, because in some ways the opposite seemed true: nothing quite real or sincere. Carter’s conscious thought ebbed away from the B.S. kids and immaturity; her right hand pinched the cup to ensure she still had it. A connection flashed across her mind shoving past the cup, of no difference between the restrained and genuine, maybe. No, they were just kids and that was stupid. She shook the thought away.

        The crowd moved a little, more rotating than converging, towards the machine. Through its thinning she noticed Blake, from an organic chemistry focus, which she remembered was the smallest with only twelve members. Blake came and went and found interesting things to say, Carter seeing him mostly during meals and activities with their foci different. He seemed friendly without being loud, and had never really annoyed or bored her, so she held him in pretty good regard. He reached in the crate by the machine and brought a glass-looking cup, actually plastic Carter knew from seeing the type close up. Meanwhile Phia came to stand next to her, waiting, in one hand an orange, naveled, unlike the ones usually stocked. With the other hand she took out her phone, and momentarily from the way she looked at the glass screen Carter thought she’d been distracted by some game, which she thought a little uncalled for in a fifteen second wait. But Phia then lowered the phone decisively, its floral patterned white case sliding under the hem of her pocket.

        Just her luck, Carter reflected, that all these characters had come to the drink machine and the same time as her. It couldn’t be really be helped, but it did seem like lately the world had taken to interposing people in front of her– she’d been exposed to plenty of them  in the prior three weeks. By the beginning of week two, the new car smell had worn down and the over-saturation of people had made her a bit numb to them. Thinking about it, she might also have grown a bit numb to the Acacia residential life, and the stock mix of honeydew and pineapple. Maybe she just needed more sleep. Between her research project and Ender’s Game, she’d fallen behind.

       The B.S. kid now carried a cup of his own, and looked about second in the circulation that passed for a line. The sun’s rays shown yellowed and viscous through one of the hall’s windows, and Carter took them in the eye as she stepped around behind the boy, his tousled hair momentarily silhouetted. Blake stood along the rim of the procession, putting Carter actually closer to the machine than him, though he had rotated further. Finished topping off his aluminum bottle and picking it up from the machine’s plastic grate, the man at the machine slid off to his left, away from the semicircular queue. Having half stepped out of his way, the B.S. student slid into the vacuum, fluidly. The machine’s root beer tap was second from the left, so he positioned himself mostly on the far side.

        The boy stepped his right foot again to the side, and it seemed to Carter that he looked almost at her as he did. There was nothing but to step in and take up her position at the center water dispenser. Glancing back at Blake as she took her turn, because really it should have been his, she saw he’d removed his glasses to rub his eye, but reached his cup hand forward as she turned.  His arm extended beside her to the left, three fingers on the glass and another opening the spigot for blue gatorade. The machine’s currents flowed with about the diameter of a nickel, aerated but uniform.  As she turned forward, a navy sleeved hand descended upon the pink lemonade tap to her right. Phia voiced a “hey”, pleasantly.  Carter pulled her body back slightly, achieving a rough balance of space between the four of them.

        A pink current joined the clear, blue, and brown, each orthogonal to the row of cups aligned to receive them. They flowed with a certain togetherness, towards four hands extended in independent yet common cause. On her left she saw the Briggs’ scholar gazing down to where the four hands would meet; her focusmate looking there too with a cool pleasantry.  Blake had his body turned for reach, but he too watched, his head turned over his shoulder.  Carter needed only to center her head and eyes to gaze upon the fluid quartet of pillars. Now she did.

        Aeration whitened the four’s colors, and the common hall’s incandescent lights made the cups on the right glisten yellower than those closer to the window. The sound of the machine’s pumping– either refrigerant or the drink itself– mixed with the clamor of the halls, but was steady. In the angled sunlight and her tired eyes, the currents shone colors like beams of light. As some united mystical exaltation , their hands came together clutching plastic and radiated sunbeams, even the brown.  They four were ordinary,  not heroes, even for those few seconds, but together they had wrought unremarked heroism. Contemporaries of fire, air, earth, and water coursed through them, reflected in their eyes, whether aware or not, and yes, they all, even if the taps were shutting and currents dying as Carter thought it, were in some vital sense one. 
