---
title: "*10:04* Octopus Ending"
category: stories
tags: [new age bullshit, realistic fiction, octopus, perception, collectivity]
date: 2020-04-20
---

*I originally wrote this April 2020 for a class assignment*

Unessay: A *10:04* Ending Told by the Spineless

The aquarium had placed lighting along the underside of the steel railing, so that brightness refracted through the glass and the lapping water at the pool’s edge, jagged and aligned after the sharp angles. Today, brighter pillars had been placed around the outside, so you could sit and see several of them against your skin at once, a softer isotropic light dimmer than daylight but persisting as dawn came and turned to darkness. The people came and slumped stiffly around the lights and in the space between, fiddling anxiously on polar rectangles of light which limblessly, instantly linked thousands of the suckers, some of whom had literally faced death from both drowning and dehydradiation in the past 48 hours. I slid by largely unnoticed, a strange feeling around so many warm bodies, another sign of the ten generation storm whose effects I kept seeing but never feeling.  Two more people circled down and through the room, a man and a woman, looking dryer and cleaner than most, but stopping to pick up a bottled water and charge electronics, and I am kidding and I am not kidding when I say I intuited a flesh and blood intelligence, felt subject to a network of sensations and memories that were not my own: the ability to discern wavelengths of light emanating from the phones and exit signs, of carrying children within me or by my side, a cerebral anxiety within my ossified body, of needing each one to turn out right. I was thinking all this stretched against the rocks, water lapping between my arms, with an outstretched intelligence in a city with 8 million human sensors, a fateful collectivity churned by the storm. 

The seawater was warm as ever, so there had been back up power to spare, along with good drainage. Later, the informally distributed water, light, and electricity would cede to FEMA efforts organized elsewhere, but in the first few days 100s of people must have wandered through the tide pool room alone, staff quietly ensuring the occupancy remained under 1c. A tired looking boy and woman came through, sitting with bottles and charging and refreshing their bright rectangular screens, and I saw from many sides at once the bright aligned nodes of light. Humans have a strange and presumably very evolutionarily useful proprioception, a spatial  awareness of each limb and digit, but for the great collectivity of this city, the self awareness is more familiar: a billion links sensing the tensions between millions of sensing, thinking nodes, but aware only of the network’s overall shape by looking down at ourselves. Now in this exhibit a teenager texts her friend, informing her they’d been flooded but hoped soon to move in with a relation upstate; governors and news crews circled the city from helicopters, commenting that two million lacked power, and so the city learned of its state. Another palette of bottled water arrived; it must have been sitting at some vendor. Humans possess, it is believed, a remarkable wisdom, memories collected and shared over the course of an unimaginably long life. I think these thoughts for the future of the cephalopods: 

Through Brooklyn pass the storm shaken humans, slow but understanding far beyond our imaginations. The man and woman amble out now, a half hour later, seeming reassured and speaking of home. Theirs and every journey I see tonight will seem newly individual, a wisdom with a deep past and anticipated future, a feature of the city’s collectivity which gives wonder to its possibility. It’s all a part of the change: the warming oceans will carry us farther and faster. On a young man’s phone an image like blue waves will appear, their crests slightly shifted. It might be a still from a game, sent between friends, or some strange dispersion, spontaneous breaking. I’ll see the light posts start to flicker, by then they will have moved most of their emergency management and only a few latecomers will remain, distributing the remaining bottles. One woman will say that her friend’s entire neighborhood was flooded, and they will resolve to take two each and carry the remaining 2a to the tents in central park. This too will appear as a good form of individuality, a collective possible among the eight million timeless brains. Sliding into the water, I will remind myself not to get carried away. 

Submerged, I will begin to remember these days, this wounded collectivity, in the second person singular, the implicit whole that is the unspoken subject of every literary thought. I know it is hard to understand / I am with you, and I know how it is. 



Artist’s Statement

To be honest, my main reason for writing this was because I thought it would be fun and interesting to try. Obviously, there is a lot of suspension of disbelief when an octopus is narrating, which deviates from the hyperrealism that characterizes 10:04.  However, I tried to include themes and lines of writing that mimicked parts of the book, and thought about how different a perspective an octopus would have on topics such as perception, human cognition and memory, a sort of social intelligence, climate change, and raising children.

I found the octopus’ decentralized intelligence a particularly interesting area for contrast: a large fraction of their nervous system is in the arms and interestingly, they can detect tension in the arms but don’t have proprioception of the overall shape of their bodies without looking at themselves. Much of 10:04 focuses on a sort of city wide intelligence, a bad collectivity which also shows great possibility, and here there is a connection to an octopus’ decentralized nervous system, which I referenced in the second paragraph (and which Lerner evokes in 10:04). For example, Lerner describes the city’s sensing ability by saying “From a million media, most of them handheld, awareness of the storm seeped into the city… I mean the city was becoming one organism” (17). However, with an octopus who is already familiar with this sort of decentralized intelligence, I thought it might be meaningful to emphasize the individuality of human cognition. Things we take for granted trapped in our heads, such as memories developed over a decades long lifespan, learning from parents, and individual depth within social connectivity that an octopus might think were much more interesting. As part of this, some of the treatment of individuals and collectives is flipped from 10:04. For example, while the book’s narration claims it is addressed to “a still-uninhabited second person plural” (108), the octopus switches it to a singular second person whole. 

There are a number of smaller details about the octopus’ perception that I will point out. There are sensory details like being able to sense polarized light but not color, the idea of bones and being confined within a brain are striking, and the fact that octopuses can sense an enormous amount with their arms but do not have a spatial awareness or proprioception of what shape their arms are forming the way humans do. Related to the life cycle, octopuses live only a few years, so they would not build up wisdom and memories over the same timescale humans do, and they also don’t learn from parents of other octopuses. This means that while a human might see a future “as it is now, just a little different,” an octopus might sense in them a much greater influence of past wisdom and anxiety planning for the future. Octopuses also do not raise young past the stage when they are eggs, which is a stark contrast to the amount of care and worry that humans put into their children, a major theme in 10:04. Interestingly, octopuses are likely to benefit from warmer oceans as an effect of climate change, so this forms an interesting contrast to the human characters. Lastly there are small details in the language I tried to use, such as implying that “a bottled water” and the concepts of parenting are strange, and representing numbers in hexadecimal (base 16, eg 1c = 28 and 2a = 42). (Being limited to 1c is also a double entendre with the speed of light, but I didn’t really plan out any symbolism here except fitting into the theme of physical underpinnings in perception). 

I think the themes of decentralized intelligence, collectivity, and an outsider perspective of human cognition are most important. More than make one argument, I am trying to see how important themes of the novel would look from a very different perspective. It is also a way of looking at how perception and lifestyle affect perspective, but I had to anthropomorphize these quite a bit to be able to write something that resembled 10:04. 

Below, I have cited some sources I used to learn more about octopus sensing and intelligence. 

Citations: 
Harmon, Katherine. “Polarized Display Sheds Light on Octopus and Cuttlefish Vision-and 
    Camouflage.” Scientific American Blog Network, Scientific American, 20 Feb. 2012, 
    blogs.scientificamerican.com/octopus-chronicles/polarized-display-sheds-light-on- 
    octopus- and-cuttlefish-vision-and-camouflage/.
“Octopus.” Wikipedia, Wikimedia Foundation, 12 Apr. 2020, 
    en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Octopus#Nervous_system_and_senses.
Wong, Kate. “Octopus Arm Has a Mind of Its Own.” Scientific American, Scientific American, 7 
    Sept. 2001, www.scientificamerican.com/article/octopus-arm-has-a-mind-of/.
